plugins/code-guardian/commands/ci.md, before:

---
name: security-guardian-ci
description: Generate CI security scanning pipeline configuration
argument-hint: "[github-actions|gitlab-ci|auto]"
allowed-tools:
  - Bash
  - Read
  - Write
  - AskUserQuestion
  - Glob
---

# CI Security Pipeline Generator

Generate CI/CD pipeline configuration for security scanning based on the project's detected stack.

## Execution Flow

### Step 1: Detect Stack

```bash
bash ${CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT}/scripts/detect-stack.sh .
```

### Step 2: Determine CI System

If `$ARGUMENTS` specifies a CI system, use that. Otherwise:

1. Check detected CI systems from stack detection
2. If multiple CI systems detected, ask which one to generate for
3. If none detected, ask the user which CI system they use (offer: GitHub Actions, GitLab CI, other)

### Step 3: Check Existing CI Config

Check if there's already a security scanning configuration:
- GitHub Actions: look for `.github/workflows/security*` or security-related steps in existing workflows
- GitLab CI: look for security stages in `.gitlab-ci.yml`

If security scanning already exists, show what's configured and suggest additions/improvements.

### Step 4: Generate Configuration

```bash
bash ${CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT}/scripts/ci-recommend.sh \
  --stack-json /tmp/cg-stack.json \
  --ci-system <system>
```

### Step 5: Present and Write

Present the generated configuration to the user. Ask if they want to:

1. **Write to file**: Create/update the CI config file directly
2. **View only**: Just display it for manual copy
3. **Customize**: Modify before writing (e.g., change triggers, add/remove tools)

If writing to file:
- GitHub Actions: Write to `.github/workflows/security.yml`
- GitLab CI: Append to `.gitlab-ci.yml` or create `.gitlab-ci-security.yml` for include

### Step 6: Additional Recommendations

Based on the stack, recommend:
- Pre-commit hooks for local scanning (gitleaks, semgrep)
- Branch protection rules to require security checks
- Scheduled scans for dependency vulnerabilities (weekly)
- SARIF upload for GitHub Security tab integration

## Important Notes

- Never overwrite existing CI config without confirmation
- If the project already has CI, suggest adding security as a new job/stage rather than a separate workflow (when appropriate)
- Include `allow_failure: true` or `continue-on-error: true` for initial rollout so security doesn't block all PRs
- Always include secret detection (gitleaks) as a baseline

Commit message:

feat(code-guardian): add state caching between setup, scan, and ci commands
Cache stack detection and tool availability results in
.claude/code-guardian-cache.json so scan/ci can reuse setup's
verified results instead of re-detecting from scratch every time.
24h TTL with --refresh escape hatch on scan.

plugins/code-guardian/commands/ci.md, after:

---
name: security-guardian-ci
description: Generate CI security scanning pipeline configuration
argument-hint: "[github-actions|gitlab-ci|auto]"
allowed-tools:
  - Bash
  - Read
  - Write
  - AskUserQuestion
  - Glob
---

# CI Security Pipeline Generator

Generate CI/CD pipeline configuration for security scanning based on the project's detected stack.

## Execution Flow

### Step 1: Check Cache

Try to load cached detection results before running full detection:

```bash
bash ${CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT}/scripts/cache-state.sh --read --max-age 86400
```

- **Exit 0** (fresh cache): Parse the returned JSON to extract `stack` and `tools` fields. Use cached stack data — tell the user "Using cached stack detection" and **skip Step 1.5**. Save the tools data for use in Step 5.
- **Exit 1 or 2** (missing/stale): Continue to Step 1.5 for fresh detection.

### Step 1.5: Detect Stack

```bash
bash ${CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT}/scripts/detect-stack.sh .
```

### Step 2: Determine CI System

If `$ARGUMENTS` specifies a CI system, use that. Otherwise:

1. Check detected CI systems from stack detection
2. If multiple CI systems detected, ask which one to generate for
3. If none detected, ask the user which CI system they use (offer: GitHub Actions, GitLab CI, other)

### Step 3: Check Existing CI Config

Check if there's already a security scanning configuration:
- GitHub Actions: look for `.github/workflows/security*` or security-related steps in existing workflows
- GitLab CI: look for security stages in `.gitlab-ci.yml`

If security scanning already exists, show what's configured and suggest additions/improvements.

### Step 4: Generate Configuration

```bash
bash ${CLAUDE_PLUGIN_ROOT}/scripts/ci-recommend.sh \
  --stack-json /tmp/cg-stack.json \
  --ci-system <system>
```

### Step 5: Present and Write

Present the generated configuration to the user.

If tools data was loaded from the cache (Step 1), include a summary showing which tools the user already has locally versus which will be CI-only:
> **Your local setup**: semgrep (Docker), gitleaks (local), ...
> **CI will add**: trivy, checkov, ... (not available locally)

Ask if they want to:

1. **Write to file**: Create/update the CI config file directly
2. **View only**: Just display it for manual copy
3. **Customize**: Modify before writing (e.g., change triggers, add/remove tools)

If writing to file:
- GitHub Actions: Write to `.github/workflows/security.yml`
- GitLab CI: Append to `.gitlab-ci.yml` or create `.gitlab-ci-security.yml` for include

### Step 6: Additional Recommendations

Based on the stack, recommend:
- Pre-commit hooks for local scanning (gitleaks, semgrep)
- Branch protection rules to require security checks
- Scheduled scans for dependency vulnerabilities (weekly)
- SARIF upload for GitHub Security tab integration

## Important Notes

- Never overwrite existing CI config without confirmation
- If the project already has CI, suggest adding security as a new job/stage rather than a separate workflow (when appropriate)
- Include `allow_failure: true` or `continue-on-error: true` for initial rollout so security doesn't block all PRs
- Always include secret detection (gitleaks) as a baseline
